Add new major release policy to doc (#54)
silverstripe/developer-docs: en/06_Project_Governance/05_Major_release_policy.md

---
title: Major Release Policy
summary: Outline the major release lifecycle and support commitment for Silverstripe CMS
icon: comments
---

# Major Release Policy

## Scope of the policy

> This policy applies to all commercially supported modules.

Reviewer: Link to the commercially supported module page

> Community modules are not covered by this policy. Modules under the `silverstripe` vendor name that are not commercially supported are updated on a best effort basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Community modules are not covered by this policy. Modules in the `silverstripe` github organisation that are not commercially supported are updated on a best effort basis.
```
Anyone can arbitrarily call their module `silverstripe/my-module` on composer and therefore would be under the `silverstripe` vendor name.

> ## General approach to Major releases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## General approach to major releases
```

> Silverstripe CMS aims to deliver regular major releases at predefined intervals with a clear support timeline. The key objectives of this policy is to allow Silverstripe CMS project owners to plan major upgrades ahead of time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Silverstripe CMS aims to deliver regular major releases at predefined intervals with a clear support timeline. The key objective of this policy is to allow Silverstripe CMS project owners to plan major upgrades ahead of time
```

> The main function of major releases is to ship *breaking changes* that can not be shipped in a minor releases. These changes are primarily aimed at making sure the major releases can be supported for the full duration of its lifecycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main function of major releases is to ship *breaking changes* that can not be shipped in minor releases. These changes are primarily aimed at making sure the major releases can be supported for the full duration of its lifecycle.
```

The lifecycle for a Silverstripe CMS major release line is:
- pre-release (undefined duration)
- active development (2 years)
- bug and security fixes (1 year)

> - security fixes only (1 year).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- security fixes only (1 year)
```

Author: Having a dot on the final item in a list is the the recommended approach in our [writing style guide](https://silverstripe.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/MAR/pages/506364107/Silverstripe+Writing+Style+Guide).

> The first type of bulleted list leads on from an introductory statement. All the items must match grammatically and complete the lead-in statement. Use a colon at the end of the lead-in statement. Put a full stop only at the end of the last bullet point.

Reviewer: Interesting.... I don't personally like it but I can hardly argue with policy. I'll make a note to refer to this guide for the linting issue as well.

> The primary focus of major releases is to:

Reviewer: We've already talked about the "key objectives" and "main function", and now we're talking "primary focus" - while slightly different, these all have very similar meanings. Maybe these should be put together?

Author: I'll use something more neutral like "Most of the changes shipped in a major release will:"

- upgrade third party dependencies

> - remove and clean up deprecated APIs

Reviewer: How does "clean up" differ from "remove"?

Author: I was trying to communicate that we might change API that have not been deprecated but are confusing.

I'll try `remove deprecated APIs and clean up ambiguous APIs`

> - implement architectural changes that can not reasonably be introduced in a minor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- implement architectural changes that can not reasonably be introduced in a minor release
```

At launch, major releases may contain new features not present in the previous major release line. However, this is a secondary concern. New features will usually ship in minor releases.

## Upgrading to a new major release

Major releases are not backward compatible. Most projects will require at least some development work to upgrade to a new major release.

> Silverstripe CMS provides a clear upgrade path to new major releases. This includes clear documentation on what breaking changes have been made to each area of Silverstripe CMS.

Reviewer: Maybe link to the "Upgrading" section of the docs

## Major release lifecycle

A Silverstripe CMS major release line follows a predefined life cycle. New Silverstripe CMS majors are released in odd years (e.g. 2023, 2025, 2027, etc). At any given time, only two major release lines are officially supported.

### Pre-release

> A Silverstripe CMS stable major release is preceded by beta period of at least three month. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Silverstripe CMS stable major release is preceded by a beta period of at least three months.
```

The purpose of the beta period is to:

- allow early adopters to plan their upgrade
- identify bugs in the major release

> - help community module add support for the new major early on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- help community modules add support for the new major release early on
```

Once a new major enters the beta period, it should be compatible with the dependencies intended to ship in the stable release. Substantial breaking changes should be avoided post-beta.

Prior to the beta period, alpha releases are published at the discretion of the development team.

### Stable release

> New major releases of Silverstripe CMS are tagged between April and June of odd years.

Reviewer: Weren't we talking about a March release? Where did April to June come from?

Author: I kept saying March when I meant to say first quarter of the year. April first is the start of our financial year.

Also to have any luck of releasing in March, we pretty much have to tag the beta before the end of the previous year.

If you think the March vs April makes a difference, I'm happy to stick to March.

Reviewer: I'm perfectly happy with going with the first quarter of our financial year - just wanted to make sure I hadn't missed something there. The more time we have for this first one the better imo.

### Active development

Once a major release is stable, it enters a period of active development. A major release in active development:
- Will receive regular minor releases that ships new feature and API in a backward compatible way.

> - Will receive regular patches for low impact bugs and low severity security issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- will receive regular minor releases that ships new feature and API in a backward compatible way
- will receive regular patches for low impact bugs and low severity security issues
```
Makes it consistent with the other lists formatting

Author: I'll re-gig those a bit to use the present tense and separate security issues from regular bugs.

> A major releases line will stay in "active development" of approximatively two years. "Active development" for a major release line ends when the follow up major release is tagged stable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A major releases line will stay in "active development" for approximatively two years. "Active development" for a major release line ends when the next major release is tagged stable.
```

> Only one major release line is in "active development" at once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only one major release line is in "active development" at a time.
```
or "at any given time"

### Bug and security fixes

A Silverstripe CMS major release line enters the "bug and security fixes" phase once the follow major release is tagged stable.

Release lines in the "bug and security fixes" phase will receive:
- patches for low impact bugs

> - patches for low low severity security issues. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- patches for low impact bugs
- patches for low severity security issues
```
Only low? Maybe something like "patches for bugs of any impact level" would be more appropriate?

Author: I've reworded those entries to align with the language used in the previous section.

Release lines in the "bug and security fixes" phase will not receive:
- new feature or new APIs

> - new minor releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- new minor releases
```

Author: View writing style guide.

A major release line stays in the "bug and security fixes" phase for 1 year.

> ### Security fixes only

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### Security fixes only
```

> At the end of "Bug and security fixes" phase, a Silverstripe CMS major release line transition to the "security fixes only" phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end of "Bug and security fixes" phase, a Silverstripe CMS major release line transitions to the "security fixes only" phase.
```

In the "security fixes only" phase, a Silverstripe CMS major release line will only receive patches for high impact security issues defined has having a CVSS of 7.0 or above.

### End-of-life

> A Silverstripe CMS major release line will be end-of-life once its follow up major release line exit active development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Silverstripe CMS major release line will be end-of-life once the next major release line exits active development.
```

> End-of-life major release do not receive any security fixes or bug fixes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
End-of-life major releases do not receive updates of any kind including security fixes or bug fixes. 
```

## PHP Support commitments

> Silverstripe CMS major releases tracks PHP releases. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Silverstripe CMS major releases track PHP releases. 
```

The Silverstripe CMS release cycle is built around the assumptions that:
- New PHP releases are shipped at the end of November on an annual basis.

> - PHP releases are in full support for two years with 1 year of limited support. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- new PHP releases are shipped at the end of November on an annual basis
- PHP releases are in full support for two years with 1 year of limited support
```
Follows the formatting of other lists

> At launch, a Silverstripe CMS major release support all PHP version in full support. PHP versions in limited support are not supported at launch by new Silverstripe CMS majors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At launch, a Silverstripe CMS major release supports all PHP version in full support. PHP versions in limited support are not supported at launch by new Silverstripe CMS major versions.
```

> Following the initial release of a Silverstripe CMS major, we will aim to add forward compatibility for the next PHP release. e.g.: Silverstripe CMS 5 at launch will support PHP 8.1 and PHP 8.2. Will aim to add support for an eventual PHP 8.3 release to CMS 5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the initial release of a Silverstripe CMS major version, we will aim to add forward compatibility for the next PHP release. e.g.: Silverstripe CMS 5 at launch will support PHP 8.1 and PHP 8.2. Will aim to add support for an eventual PHP 8.3 release to CMS 5.
```
I think we should avoid saying "major" as a noun on its own, and instead say "major release" or "major version" explicitly. Just keeps the language a little more formal which is appropriate for a policy document.

> We try our best not to drop support for older PHP releases within Silverstripe CMS major release line even if those PHP release reach end-of-life.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We try our best not to drop support for older PHP releases within Silverstripe CMS major release line even if those PHP releases reach end-of-life.
```

Reviewer: Technically this language suggests that we will retain support for EOL php versions even to the detriment of the product, because that would be trying our best. Maybe add something like "but we reserve the right to drop support for such releases if necessary to maintain the security and integrity of the CMS codebase"

Reviewer 3: correct, as discussed in https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-framework/issues/10345#issuecomment-1171933321. I think it is important that there is one PHP version that you can use during the whole lifecycle of one major SS version.

Author: I'll go with "We try our best not to drop support for older PHP releases within Silverstripe CMS major release line even if those PHP release reach end-of-life. Support for end-of-life PHP versions maybe drop if it's necessary to address vulnerabilities or high impact bugs."

> We try our best not to drop support for older PHP releases within Silverstripe CMS major release line even if those PHP release reach end-of-life.

Reviewer 3: I would even go further and align this with the handling of fixed dependencies, because really, that's what PHP is, no?

```suggestion
Within a Silverstripe major release line, we will not drop support for the latest actively maintained PHP release at the time of the initial major Silverstripe release (e.g. PHP 8.2 for Silverstripe 5), even if that PHP release reaches end-of-life. The only exception is if the upgrade is necessary to fix a high impact bug or security vulnerability. 
```

When PHP 8.2 reaches end-of-life in 2025, Silverstripe 5 will only receive bug end security fixes anyway.

Author: I'm trying to find a balance between readability, clarity and not painting ourselves in a corner. 

I'll go with:
> Support for end-of-life PHP releases is not dropped within a Silverstripe CMS major release line, unless it's necessary to address vulnerabilities or high impact bugs.

## Dependency management

> At launch new Silverstripe CMS majors aim to have all PHP and JS dependencies on their latest stable version. For dependencies offering a *Long Term Support* version, the latest LTS of that dependency will be preferred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At launch new Silverstripe CMS major releases aim to have all PHP and JavaScript dependencies on their latest stable versions. For dependencies offering a *Long Term Support* version, the latest LTS of that dependency will be preferred.
```

The Silverstripe CMS development team will define a list of "fixed dependencies" for each Silverstripe CMS major release line. *Fixed dependencies* will not changed for the lifetime of a Silverstripe CMS major release line.

> Support for newer major releases of fixed dependencies will not be retroactively added to Silverstripe CMS major release line, even if the currently used version is end-of-life. The only exception is if the upgrade is necessary to fix a high impact bug or security vulnerability. We’ll only support 1 major release line of each fixed dependency.

Reviewer: Supporting multiple major releases of symfony specifically might be a good idea, because packages that some projects will want to use which have symfony dependencies may not be as up-to-date as we are.

Author: We'll be running one year behind Symfony. Presuming, people are not in a desperate hurry to jump on the latest major Silverstripe CMS, that should give other vendor a reasonable chance to add support for newer symfony releases.

Symfony is a bit special and there could be a case for treating it a bit like we treat PHP. e.g.: Support for all fully supported majors or add support for new majors as they are release.

Maybe this is something we can revisit once Symfony 7 is released. I would rather start with a stricter support model and loosen it later, rather than start with a loose approach and discover its a major pain in the backside.

Reviewer: Fair enough, I'm okay revisiting this when we have some real world usage of this policy to reflect on.

> Non-fixed dependencies may be upgraded to new major releases or swap out altogether within a Silverstripe CMS release line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-fixed dependencies may be upgraded to new major releases or swapped out altogether within a Silverstripe CMS release line.
```

### Symfony support commitments

> Symfony is a collection of common PHP libraries Silverstripe CMS uses. At launch, Silverstripe CMS majors will track the latest stable major of Symfony dependencies. A Silverstripe CMS major release line will not add support for later Symfony major release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Symfony is a collection of common PHP libraries Silverstripe CMS uses. At launch, Silverstripe CMS major releases will track the latest stable major release of Symfony dependencies. A Silverstripe CMS major release line will not add support for later Symfony major releases.
```

## Commercially supported module

Commercially supported modules are reviewed with each new major release. At launch, the list of commercially supported modules for that release line is explicitly defined.

> New modules maybe added to the list of commercially for that major release line during its lifespan. We aimed not to withdraw support for modules for the duration of that major release life span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New modules may be added to the list of commercially supported modules for that major release line during its lifespan. We aimed not to withdraw support for modules for the duration of that major release life span.
```

Author: I've added a bit in there to provide an example for when we would consider dropping support for module within a major release lifetime.

> Modules that are supported for one major release line may not be supported for follow up release line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modules that are supported for one major release line may not be supported for follow up release lines.
```

## Expected Major releases timeline

> (Put a pretty Graphic here)

Reviewer: Probably link to the roadmap page on .org instead?

Author: That page will probably only show current releases ... not future ones.

Reviewer: Maybe it will make more sense once this graphic exists, then?
I think this PR probably should be in draft still without this graphic though. We can hardly merge it as is.

Reviewer: Please either add a graphic or remove this placeholder text

Author: Pretty picture has been added.

## Major release lifecycle

A Silverstripe CMS major release line follows a predefined life cycle. New Silverstripe CMS majors are released in odd years (e.g. 2023, 2025, 2027, etc). At any given time, only two major release lines are officially supported.

### Pre-release

A Silverstripe CMS stable major release is preceded by a beta period of at least three months.

The purpose of the beta period is to:

- allow early adopters to plan their upgrade
- identify bugs in the major release
- help community modules add support for the new major release early on.

Once a new major enters the beta period, it should be compatible with the dependencies intended to ship in the stable release. Substantial breaking changes should be avoided post-beta.

Prior to the beta period, alpha releases are published at the discretion of the development team.

### Stable release

New major releases of Silverstripe CMS are tagged between April and June of odd years.

### Active development

Once a major release is stable, it enters a period of active development. A major release in active development receives:

> - regular minor releases that ships new feature and API in a backward compatible way

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- regular minor releases that ship new features and API in a backward compatible way
```

Author: Done

- regular patches for bugs at all impact levels
- security patches for all vulnerabilities.

> A major releases line stays in *active development* for approximatively two years. *Active development* for a major release line ends when the next major release is tagged stable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A major release line stays in *active development* for approximately two years. *Active development* for a major release line ends when the next major release is tagged stable.
```

Author: Done

### Bug and security fixes

A Silverstripe CMS major release line enters the *bug and security fixes* phase once the follow major release is tagged stable.

A major release line in the *bug and security fixes* phase receives:
- regular patches for bugs at all impact levels
- security patches for all vulnerabilities.

A major release line in the *bug and security fixes* phase does **not** receive:
- new feature
- new APIs
- new minor releases.

A major release line stays in the *bug and security fixes* phase for 1 year.

### Security fixes only

At the end of *bug and security fixes* phase, a Silverstripe CMS major release line transitions to the *security fixes only* phase.

In the *security fixes only* phase, a Silverstripe CMS major release line only receives patches for high impact security issues defined has having a CVSS of 7.0 or above.

### End-of-life

A Silverstripe CMS major release line reaches *end-of-life* once the next major release line exits active development.

End-of-life major releases do not receive updates of any kind including security fixes or bug fixes.

## PHP support commitments

Silverstripe CMS major releases track PHP releases. 

> The Silverstripe CMS release cycle is built around these assumptions.
> 
> - New PHP releases are shipped at the end of November on an annual basis.
> - PHP releases are in full support for two years with a year of limited support. 

Reviewer: Should this be using the colon format? I.e. are the list items "these assumptions"?
```suggestion
The Silverstripe CMS release cycle is built around these assumptions:

- new PHP releases are shipped at the end of November on an annual basis
- PHP releases are in full support for two years with a year of limited support. 
```

Author: done

> - PHP releases are in full support for two years with a year of limited support. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PHP releases are in full support for two years with one year of limited support. 
```

Author: done

> At launch, a Silverstripe CMS major release supports all PHP versions in full support. PHP versions in limited support are not supported at launch by new Silverstripe CMS major release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At launch, a Silverstripe CMS major release supports all PHP versions in full support. PHP versions in limited support are not supported at launch by new Silverstripe CMS major releases.
```
I prefer "versions" for the last word here but "releases" works too, so long as it's plural.

Author: done

> Following the initial release of a Silverstripe CMS major release, the development team aims to add forward compatibility for the next PHP release. e.g.: Silverstripe CMS 5 at launch will support PHP 8.1 and PHP 8.2. CMS 5 should receive official support for an eventual PHP 8.3 in early 2024.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the initial release of a Silverstripe CMS major version, the development team aims to add forward compatibility for the next PHP release. e.g.: Silverstripe CMS 5 at launch will support PHP 8.1 and PHP 8.2. CMS 5 should receive official support for an eventual PHP 8.3 in early 2024.
```
"Following the release of a release" sounds pretty bad.
An alternative would be "Following a new Silverstripe CMS Major release,"

Author: Switched to "Following the initial launch of a Silverstripe CMS major release"

Support for end-of-life PHP releases is not dropped within a Silverstripe CMS major release line, unless it's necessary to address vulnerabilities or high impact bugs.

> Major releases lines not in active development do not receive official support for later PHP releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Major release lines not in active development do not receive official support for later PHP releases.
```

Author: done

## Dependency management

At launch, Silverstripe CMS major releases aim to have all PHP and JavaScript dependencies on their latest stable versions. For dependencies offering a *Long Term Support* version, the latest LTS of that dependency is preferred.

A list of *fixed dependencies* for each Silverstripe CMS major release line is explicitly defined by the development team. *Fixed dependencies* do not change for the lifetime of a Silverstripe CMS major release line.

> Support for newer major releases of fixed dependencies is not added to Silverstripe CMS major release line, even if the currently used version is end-of-life. The only exception is if the upgrade is necessary to fix a high impact bug or security vulnerability. A Silverstripe CMS major release line only support one major version of each fixed dependency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for newer major releases of fixed dependencies is not added to Silverstripe CMS major release line, even if the currently used version is end-of-life. The only exception is if the upgrade is necessary to fix a high impact bug or security vulnerability. A Silverstripe CMS major release line only supports one major version of each fixed dependency.
```

Author: done

### Symfony support commitments

Symfony is a collection of common PHP libraries Silverstripe CMS uses. At launch, Silverstripe CMS major releases track the latest stable major version of Symfony dependencies. A Silverstripe CMS major release line does not add support for later Symfony major versions.

## Commercially supported module

Commercially supported modules are reviewed with each new major release. At launch, the list of commercially supported modules for that release line is explicitly defined.

New modules may be added to the commercially supported modules list during a Silverstripe CMS major release line's lifespan. Modules are not withdrawn from the commercially supported modules list for a Silverstripe CMS major releases line unless external factors make it impractical to continue support. e.g. The module requires a discontinued third party service to work as intended.

Modules that are supported for one major release line may not be supported for follow up release lines.

## Expected Silverstripe CMS major release timeline

This timeline is provided as an indication only.

> ![Timeline of planned Silverstripe CMS major releases](../../_images/major_release_timeline.jpg)

Reviewer: Now that there is a graphic I am even more certain that this belongs on the roadmap page rather than here, since it is talking about _specific_ releases (and will therefore eventually be outdated), where this policy is intended to be release-agnostic - it doesn't care about and _specific_ releases.

[Your reasoning last time](https://github.com/silverstripe/developer-docs/pull/54#discussion_r939484942) I mentioned the roadmap page for this was:
> That page will probably only show current releases ... not future ones.

But a roadmap is really meant to be about the future, so I think that page is a perfect fit for a graphic that explicitly talks about the intended release schedule of specific future releases.

I don't think we need a graphic for this policy, but if we do have one I think it should not refer to any specific releases. This whole section in fact probably just doesn't really belong here - it should be on the roadmap page where people will be explicitly looking for release timeline info.

Reviewer: All that said, I don't feel super strongly about this - so if you want to keep the graphic here I'm okay with it in the interest of getting this over the line.

Author: The main value of the graphic is that it visually conveys what releases will happen one and the overlap between releases. 

Happy to move the graphic to an eventual roadmap page once SSORG is rebuilt. In the short term, I think it provides value.
